---
layout: post
title:  "Do things, write about it, look for feedback"
published:   2013-09-02
categories: musings
---

Matt Swanson recently wrote a really great blog post called ["Do things, write about it"](http://mdswanson.com/blog/2013/08/11/write-things-tell-people.html).  It references another (apparently well known) [blog post by Carl Lange](http://carl.flax.ie/dothingstellpeople.html) which is worth sitting down with a cup of coffee and mulling over.  I wanted to continue this blog-chain love letter to doing interesting things and talking to people about them, because while I think it's awesome advice, it can sometimes be hard for an industry full of introverts to reach out and say "I did this, I think it's cool, and I'm interested in getting your feedback".

Periodically some idea will strike me, I'll build a prototype, and then write some tests to make sure it's not going to fail because of an easily caught mistake.  Usually what happens next is that I'll be ready to put it up on github and suggest people go take a look at it, but I hesitate and ultimately let it quietly get swept to the side. It's not that I think there's no value in what I built, but I psych myself out wondering if instead of the constructive feedback I'd like to receive, what I'll get is a dozen variations on "Why would you even bother?".

I think there are places that people started congregating around this idea of mutually supportive software development, and I think they worked well for a while.  Github comes immediately to mind, but I think it's begun lacking in this respect because despite being populated with what I believe to be mostly well-meaning people, Github has become a place to get work done.  We spend our days making and reviewing commits, and some of us then go on to work on community open-source projects.  Github does not provide any features I know that are oriented around an open space for people to ask for help or feedback on their projects.  I don't consider this a failing of Github, but I think there is a need for that can of space for people to reach out and connect with experienced software developers with a genuine desire to provide some mentorship, even if it's only for 15 minutes reviewing some code.

I recently discovered [coderwall](https://coderwall.com/), and while I haven't had time to dig into many of its features or how it creates engagements among members of the community, it looks like a step in a positive direction.  I plan to spend some time this week investigating the ways I can contribute to the ecosystem they are building and taking some notes about what does, or does not, work.  If you have any experience with coderwall or any other tools that facilitate more open, positive collaboration between software developers I'd like to hear about them.  Contact me via my email address below or via my github account.

On a final note, I've been working on a Ruby gem for making it easier to work with some advanced data structures (starting with trees) like Quad- & Oct-Trees, R-Trees, B-Trees.  I plan to skip the hesitation and get it out there for the world to call it terrible.  Hopefully there will be some good advice on how to make it better, and more useful for the community.