---
layout: post
title:  "Standing Out From the Crowd"
published:   2013-10-15
categories: careers
---

I recently attended a job fair put on by one of the new "developer bootcamps", where the current class has an opportunity to show off the final projects that they spent the last part of their programs building.  A coworker and I went with the hope finding a few potential hires to begin the interview process with, but with the expectation that they would be a junior person whom we could help mold into a software craftsmen.  Maybe I had the wrong idea about the program, but what I found was a bit frustrating and made it.  Based on this experience, I'm going to outline some of the issues that I felt I saw, and some suggestions for how those of you who may enter into one of these bootcamps can maximize what you get out of them and make yourself an attractive candidate for software companies:

* Clones, Clones Everywhere

  With a single exception, all of the projects that we saw were in the vein of "This is a copy of (AirBnB, Evernote, Etsy, Instagram, ...)". While some of these were impressive (the Evernote clone I saw was well done for a single developer working for two weeks), when we are looking at a candidate for a position we're looking for people who are creative problem solvers.  I found it rather frustrating that there was not some interesting, original problems that some of these students had in their heads that they didn't try to leverage their time in the program to start building prototypes of.  I don't have any insight as to whether the program pushed students towards just copying some existing product, but it was clearly the status-quo.

* Is There a Template?

  I realize that ten weeks is only so long, and you can only cover so much material in that time, but every project was Rails + Backbone.  After my fourth demo I paused to ask the student if the program leaders pushed them into using particular tools and technology, but he insisted they did not.  I was a bit skeptical.  On one hand, in a program of this sort, you definitely have to make choices about what to teach based on the skills that are currently marketable.  On the other hand, the limited amount of variation (Gemfiles read like similar recipes) make it hard for someone who is looking to hire junior software developers to see qualities differentiate one candidate from another.  I believe almost anyone can learn to assemble a simple webapp given some time and instruction, but if you want to stand out to an employer, being passionate and going further than you have to really make you shine.

* We Only Need So Many Frontend People...

  The company I work for now is primarily in the data business, and while we do have some internal webapps we have for the editors curating our data, primarily we need to know how other people structure their data and how we can ingest it, transform it, and make it available for our customers.  Right now, as the business models built on the Internet mature, there is a growing need for people who are interested in building robust systems for processing all sorts of data, synthesizing skills to understand how modern web interfaces are built as well as backend scaling and architectural idioms.  As I've refined my hiring process over the years though, one thing I place a significant amount of value on is talking to candidates about what they are interested in working on.  If I'm lucky, it's a chance for a candidate to break out of the shell of the interview and really talk about what makes them want to sit in front of a computer all day.  This gives me an opportunity to synthesize the roles we need to fill with what the candidate is interested in and ideally help them find a fulfilling role within the organization.  To avoid getting too long-winded, all of the students at the program were strictly interested in front end work, and as soon as I started trying to talk to them about how those skills translated into what we did there was a definite glazing of the eyes effect.  I hope that the administrators of these programs recognize that if the focus stays exclusively on frontend development that we're going to see a glut of people with those skills making them ultimately less valuable.  Now is a good time for them to make some course corrections.

I would like to close with a few pieces of advise for students of these programs to help them stand out to people who will be looking to hire them after their ten weeks have come and gone.  I believe these programs are the start of a new way to train bright, creative thinkers and problem solvers to help build better software to solve entirely new classes of problems, but I really hope to see more as the system is iterated upon and refined.  Until that happens though, here are some things that anyone can do right now to make themselves standout a bit more:

* Ten Weeks is a Long Time
  
  For real.  It's a whole quarter at university, and instead of taking four or five disparate classes you have one unified goal: learn to build modern web applications.  Just think about it for a minute.  You've decided to completely reboot your career, you've been accepted into a program that will help guide you, and you've got ten weeks to work with other bright people to get there.  It's a long time to learn, and a short time to sacrifice everything else you can in the pursuit of these sea change in your life.  What I want to see is someone who is completely engrossed for those ten weeks in learning everything they can about the craft.  Eat, drink, and sleep software.  Dream in code. Write short blog posts about what you've learned (there are others who are in the same situation), go to meetups, and spend all night building little apps that you can throw-away but will teach you something interesting.  It may not be easy to say "no" to socializing during this time, but friends are forgiving and want to see you reach your goals.

* Self-Publicize

  The best way for me to evaluate your potential is to see the work you've done.  Luckily, Github has pioneered social coding.  The first thing I do for anyone I interview is to go checkout their profile on Github.  I love looking through the public repositories in their account.  Is this person really learning the tools they are using? Are they writing code that follows idioms for the language or framework?  Are they contributing to any open source projects (they need people to find bugs and document features too!)?  Do they write tests for their code?  Can I actual build their projects, or are they online somewhere for me to play with?  These sorts of things make a candidate standout to me.  Being perfect at every detail is not important to me as seeing tentative steps and refinement as I look over the commit history on a project.  It's an opportunity for me to see a person develop as a software developer and to learn new tricks that I can put into my toolbox.

* Try to Standout

  Top universities don't take just anyone, and neither do top companies building software.  It's always harder to get accepted into a program or to nab a job when you sit at the top of the bell curve.  As I walked around talking to students it became very easy to see certain patterns emerge.  Someone who fits all the patterns becomes very indistinct and won't come to mind as someone I need to reach out to for a follow-up.  Luckily, once you notice the patterns it becomes easy to find tweaks that you can use to make yourself standout.  If you see everyone doing A, B, and C, try adding D or swapping out B for E.  If everyone is using Rails, why not give Node.js a try?  It can even be something non-technical that you add to go that extra step.  One person I talked to briefly was particularly passionate about vintage items, and even though their project was very similar to existing web apps out there for buying and selling items, they were able to infuse it with extra touches that made it stand out in my mind.  This person wasn't a good fit for us but I would certainly push them towards other companies that I know are hiring those skills.